docs/common_issues.rst, before:

.. _common issues:

Common issues & solutions
*************************

.. hint::
    If you find any issues that you cannot solve, please :ref:`get in touch through our help pages <help>`!


General solutions
=================
:ref:`Update PlanetMapper <updating_planetmapper>` to make sure you are running the latest version. It is possible that your bug may have been fixed in a recent update (you can also check the release notes for each version `on GitHub <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/releases>`_).


Installation issues
===================
PlanetMapper requires a minimum Python version of 3.10, so if you get `ERROR: No matching distribution found for planetmapper` when trying to :ref:`install PlanetMapper <installation>`, it is likely that your python version is too old. You can check your Python version by running `python3 --version` in a terminal.


SPICE Errors
============
If you have any errors caused reported by the SPICE system, it is likely that it doesn't have the correct SPICE kernels loaded. Therefore, make sure you have the :ref:`appropriate SPICE kernels downloaded <SPICE kernels>` to your computer and that you have set :ref:`the kernel directory<kernel directory>` correctly.

`SpiceNOLEAPSECONDS` Error
--------------------------
This error usually occurs when SPICE has not loaded *any* of your desired kernels. This may be because PlanetMapper is not looking in the correct directory for your kernels, so make sure you have set :ref:`the kernel directory<kernel directory>` correctly.


`SpiceSPKINSUFFDATA` Error
--------------------------
This error usually occurs when SPICE has successfully loaded some kernels, but is missing ephemeris data for either the target body or the observer body. This may be because you have not downloaded the appropriate kernel containing the ephemeris data for this body. 

The error message should tell you which body is missing, and you can then identify the correct kernel to download by searching the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_. For example, if you are missing data for a planetary body, you can search the `generic_kernels/spk/satellites/aa_summaries.txt <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/aa_summaries.txt>`_ file to identify which kernel need downloading.


Planets appear are in the wrong position
========================================
This is likely to be due to an issue with your SPICE kernels or settings, possible fixes include...

- Make sure you are using the correct observer - e.g. a planet will appear in a different position from Earth and from JWST.
- Make sure you are using the correct observation time - times in PlanetMapper default to UTC, so make sure there are no time zone conversions needed.
- Make sure you have the latest version of any SPICE kernels, especially for any observers like HST or JWST which have have locations which are difficult to predict accurately.
- Make sure you are using the correct aberration correction.
- If you are using WCS information saved in the FITS header to automatically set the disc position, note that telescope pointing information (i.e. the WCS information) is never perfect. For example, due to the errors in guide star tracking, JWST pointing is only accurate to ~0.5".


PlanetMapper crashes when running graphical user interface over SSH
====================================================================
Recent versions of XQuartz `appear to have a font handling bug <https://github.com/XQuartz/XQuartz/issues/216>`_ which can cause PlanetMapper to crash when running the user interface over an SSH connection using X11 forwarding: ::

    X Error of failed request:  BadValue (integer parameter out of range for operation)
      Major opcode of failed request:  45 (X_OpenFont)
      Value in failed request:  0x60027c
      Serial number of failed request:  3572
      Current serial number in output stream:  3573

As a temporary workaround, you can set the `PLANETMAPPER_USE_X11_FONT_BUGFIX` environment variable to `true` on your remote machine before running PlanetMapper if you experience this issue. You can add the following line to to your `.bash_profile` file to automatically set this environment variable: ::

    export PLANETMAPPER_USE_X11_FONT_BUGFIX=true

This tells the PlanetMapper user interface to replace certain characters with ASCII equivalents (e.g. `↑` is replaced with `^`) which seems to prevent the use of the fonts which cause XQuartz to crash. Note that this will make the user interface slightly more ugly, but should not affect functionality. If you are still having issues after trying this workaround, you can `add a comment to the GitHub issue <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/issues/145>`_.


Wireframe plots appear warped or distorted
==========================================
This is most likely to occur when using :func:`planetmapper.Body.plot_wireframe_radec` for a target located near the celestial pole (i.e. the target's declination is near 90° or -90°). The `plot can be distorted <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/issues/323>`_ because spherical coordinates (like RA/Dec) are fundamentally impossible to represent perfectly in a 2D cartesian plot, with the distortion increasing at high declinations near the coordinate singularity at the celestial poles.

To fix this, you can use the :func:`planetmapper.Body.plot_wireframe_angular`, which by default uses a coordinate system centred on the target body, which minimises any distortion. The origin of the `angular` coordinate system can also be customised to be any point in the sky, for example, using `body.plot_wireframe_angular(origin_ra=0, origin_dec=90)` may be useful for plotting observations in the sky around the north celestial pole.

Plots may also appear distorted if using :func:`planetmapper.Body.plot_wireframe_angular` with a a custom origin that is a large distance from the target body.


RA/Dec wireframe plots appear split into two halves
===================================================
If the target body is near RA=0°, the `wireframe plot may appear to be split into two halves <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/issues/326#issuecomment-1934275816>`_, due to part of the body having RA values near 0° and part having RA values near 360°. This can be fixed by using `body.plot_wireframe_radec(use_shifted_meridian=True)`, which will plot the wireframe with RA coordinates between -180° and 180°, rather than the default of 0° to 360°.

Commit message:

Add `ContentTooShortError` to common issues
Seems to be caused when network instability interrupts a download. This isn't strictly a planetmapper issue, but presumably is more likely when downloading several >1GB files, so is worth documenting.

docs/common_issues.rst, after:

.. _common issues:

Common issues & solutions
*************************

.. hint::
    If you find any issues that you cannot solve, please :ref:`get in touch through our help pages <help>`!


General solutions
=================
:ref:`Update PlanetMapper <updating_planetmapper>` to make sure you are running the latest version. It is possible that your bug may have been fixed in a recent update (you can also check the release notes for each version `on GitHub <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/releases>`_).


Installation issues
===================
PlanetMapper requires a minimum Python version of 3.10, so if you get `ERROR: No matching distribution found for planetmapper` when trying to :ref:`install PlanetMapper <installation>`, it is likely that your python version is too old. You can check your Python version by running `python3 --version` in a terminal.


`ContentTooShortError` when downloading SPICE kernels
=====================================================
If you get a `ContentTooShortError` when trying to download SPICE kernels, it is likely that the download was interrupted before the file was fully downloaded (e.g. due to an unstable network connection). You can try re-downloading the kernel by running the download command again, or you can manually download the kernel from the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_ and place it in the correct directory.


SPICE Errors
============
If you have any errors caused reported by the SPICE system, it is likely that it doesn't have the correct SPICE kernels loaded. Therefore, make sure you have the :ref:`appropriate SPICE kernels downloaded <SPICE kernels>` to your computer and that you have set :ref:`the kernel directory<kernel directory>` correctly.

`SpiceNOLEAPSECONDS` Error
--------------------------
This error usually occurs when SPICE has not loaded *any* of your desired kernels. This may be because PlanetMapper is not looking in the correct directory for your kernels, so make sure you have set :ref:`the kernel directory<kernel directory>` correctly.


`SpiceSPKINSUFFDATA` Error
--------------------------
This error usually occurs when SPICE has successfully loaded some kernels, but is missing ephemeris data for either the target body or the observer body. This may be because you have not downloaded the appropriate kernel containing the ephemeris data for this body. 

The error message should tell you which body is missing, and you can then identify the correct kernel to download by searching the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_. For example, if you are missing data for a planetary body, you can search the `generic_kernels/spk/satellites/aa_summaries.txt <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/aa_summaries.txt>`_ file to identify which kernel need downloading.


Planets appear are in the wrong position
========================================
This is likely to be due to an issue with your SPICE kernels or settings, possible fixes include...

- Make sure you are using the correct observer - e.g. a planet will appear in a different position from Earth and from JWST.
- Make sure you are using the correct observation time - times in PlanetMapper default to UTC, so make sure there are no time zone conversions needed.
- Make sure you have the latest version of any SPICE kernels, especially for any observers like HST or JWST which have have locations which are difficult to predict accurately.
- Make sure you are using the correct aberration correction.
- If you are using WCS information saved in the FITS header to automatically set the disc position, note that telescope pointing information (i.e. the WCS information) is never perfect. For example, due to the errors in guide star tracking, JWST pointing is only accurate to ~0.5".


PlanetMapper crashes when running graphical user interface over SSH
====================================================================
Recent versions of XQuartz `appear to have a font handling bug <https://github.com/XQuartz/XQuartz/issues/216>`_ which can cause PlanetMapper to crash when running the user interface over an SSH connection using X11 forwarding: ::

    X Error of failed request:  BadValue (integer parameter out of range for operation)
      Major opcode of failed request:  45 (X_OpenFont)
      Value in failed request:  0x60027c
      Serial number of failed request:  3572
      Current serial number in output stream:  3573

As a temporary workaround, you can set the `PLANETMAPPER_USE_X11_FONT_BUGFIX` environment variable to `true` on your remote machine before running PlanetMapper if you experience this issue. You can add the following line to to your `.bash_profile` file to automatically set this environment variable: ::

    export PLANETMAPPER_USE_X11_FONT_BUGFIX=true

This tells the PlanetMapper user interface to replace certain characters with ASCII equivalents (e.g. `↑` is replaced with `^`) which seems to prevent the use of the fonts which cause XQuartz to crash. Note that this will make the user interface slightly more ugly, but should not affect functionality. If you are still having issues after trying this workaround, you can `add a comment to the GitHub issue <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/issues/145>`_.


Wireframe plots appear warped or distorted
==========================================
This is most likely to occur when using :func:`planetmapper.Body.plot_wireframe_radec` for a target located near the celestial pole (i.e. the target's declination is near 90° or -90°). The `plot can be distorted <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/issues/323>`_ because spherical coordinates (like RA/Dec) are fundamentally impossible to represent perfectly in a 2D cartesian plot, with the distortion increasing at high declinations near the coordinate singularity at the celestial poles.

To fix this, you can use the :func:`planetmapper.Body.plot_wireframe_angular`, which by default uses a coordinate system centred on the target body, which minimises any distortion. The origin of the `angular` coordinate system can also be customised to be any point in the sky, for example, using `body.plot_wireframe_angular(origin_ra=0, origin_dec=90)` may be useful for plotting observations in the sky around the north celestial pole.

Plots may also appear distorted if using :func:`planetmapper.Body.plot_wireframe_angular` with a a custom origin that is a large distance from the target body.


RA/Dec wireframe plots appear split into two halves
===================================================
If the target body is near RA=0°, the `wireframe plot may appear to be split into two halves <https://github.com/ortk95/planetmapper/issues/326#issuecomment-1934275816>`_, due to part of the body having RA values near 0° and part having RA values near 360°. This can be fixed by using `body.plot_wireframe_radec(use_shifted_meridian=True)`, which will plot the wireframe with RA coordinates between -180° and 180°, rather than the default of 0° to 360°.
