docs/installation.rst, before:

Installation
************

Installing PlanetMapper
=======================

PlanetMapper can easily be `installed from PyPi <https://pypi.org/project/planetmapper/>`_ using pip by running: ::
    
    pip install planetmapper

This will automatically install PlanetMapper, along with any dependencies (e.g. NumPy and Astropy) which you do not already have  installed.


Updating PlanetMapper
=====================

To upgrade an existing PlanetMapper installation to the latest version, run: ::

    pip install planetmapper --upgrade


First steps
===========

The core logic of PlanetMapper uses a series of files called ':ref:`SPICE kernels`' which contain the information about the positions and properties of Solar System bodies. Therefore, once you have PlanetMapper installed, you will need to :ref:`download the appropriate kernels <SPICE kernels>` before you can properly use PlanetMapper.

Once you have the SPICE kernels downloaded, you can type `planetmapper` in the command line to open an interactive window, or `import planetmapper` in a Python script to get the full functionality.

.. hint::
    Check the :ref:`list of common issues<common issues>` if you encounter any problems when using PlanetMapper

Commit message:

Adding minimum Python version to documentation

docs/installation.rst, after:

Installation
************

Installing PlanetMapper
=======================

PlanetMapper can easily be `installed from PyPi <https://pypi.org/project/planetmapper/>`_ using pip by running: ::
    
    pip install planetmapper

This will automatically install PlanetMapper, along with any dependencies (e.g. NumPy and Astropy) which you do not already have installed. Note that PlanetMapper requires a minimum Python version of 3.10.

Updating PlanetMapper
=====================

To upgrade an existing PlanetMapper installation to the latest version, run: ::

    pip install planetmapper --upgrade


First steps
===========

The core logic of PlanetMapper uses a series of files called ':ref:`SPICE kernels`' which contain the information about the positions and properties of Solar System bodies. Therefore, once you have PlanetMapper installed, you will need to :ref:`download the appropriate kernels <SPICE kernels>` before you can properly use PlanetMapper.

Once you have the SPICE kernels downloaded, you can type `planetmapper` in the command line to open an interactive window, or `import planetmapper` in a Python script to get the full functionality.

.. hint::
    Check the :ref:`list of common issues<common issues>` if you encounter any problems when using PlanetMapper
