docs/spice_kernels.rst, before:

.. _SPICE kernels:

SPICE kernels
*************

.. hint::
    If you are having issues with loading spice kernels after following the guide on this page, check the :ref:`list of common issues and solutions<common issues>`

Introduction
============
The core logic of PlanetMapper uses the SPICE system, which was developed by NASA's `Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/naif/>`_ to provide detailed and accurate information about the positions and properties of Solar System bodies and spacecraft. This SPICE database is stored in a series of files called 'SPICE kernels' which must be downloaded for PlanetMapper to function.

Most useful SPICE kernels can be found at https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/. Each individual SPICE kernel typically contains information about a specific object or set of objects (e.g. one kernel file may contain information about Jupiter and its moons, while another may contain information about a specific spacecraft). Therefore, you only need to download a small subset of the SPICE kernels.

If you already have the appropriate SPICE kernels saved to your computer, you can skip to the :ref:`section on customising the kernel directory<kernel directory>` below.


Downloading SPICE kernels
=========================
To aid in downloading appropriate SPICE kernels, PlanetMapper contains a series of useful functions such as :func:`planetmapper.kernel_downloader.download_urls` to download kernels from the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_. These functions will automatically download the SPICE kernels to your computer where they can be used by PlanetMapper, so you only need to worry about downloading the kernels once, then PlanetMapper will be able to automatically find and load them in the future.

.. note::
    By default, PlanetMapper will downloaded and search for kernels in a directory named `spice_kernels` within your user directory. If you would like to customise this location (e.g. if you already have kernels saved elsewhere), follow the instructions in the :ref:`section on customising the kernel directory<kernel directory>` below before downloading any kernels.

Required kernels
----------------
To download kernels which are required for virtually every SPICE calculation, run the following commands in Python: ::

    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/lsk/')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/pck/')

This will automatically download a series of 'leap second kernels' and 'planetary constant kernels' to your computer. The function :func:`planetmapper.kernel_downloader.download_urls` effectively replicates the file structure from the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_ to your local system. Therefore, the leap second kernels will be automatically downloaded to `~/spice_kernels/naif/generic_kernels/lsk/` and the planetary constant kernels will be downloaded to `~/spice_kernels/naif/generic_kernels/pck/`.

These required kernels are relatively small (~50KB for `.../lsk` and ~50MB for `.../pck`), so downloading them should be relatively fast. If you don't want to use :func:`planetmapper.kernel_downloader.download_urls`, you can instead manually browse and download files from https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/ yourself.

Once you have downloaded these required kernels, you will also need to download some of the ephemeris kernels described below.


Planetary ephemeris kernels
---------------------------
.. warning::
    Some SPICE ephemeris kernels can be very large (>1GB), so make sure you have enough free disk space when downloading.

The positions of solar system bodies (e.g. planets and moons) are contained in ephemeris kernels. The kernels are required for each body which you are observing, e.g. if you are using observations of Jupiter you will need to have a Jupiter kernel downloaded.

If you have enough disk space, you can easily download all the planet and moon kernels using: ::

    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/')

These `spk` kernels add up to ~30GB, so if you have limited disk space, you may want to instead download the specific kernels for the bodies you are interested in. Look at the `summaries` and `readme` text files at the top of the `planets <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/>`_ and `satellites <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/>`_ archive pages to see which specific files you want to download. 

For example, if you are only interested in Jupiter and its moons, you could use: ::

    # Note, the exact URLs in this example may not work if new kernel versions are published
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls

    # Locations of planetary system barycentres:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/de430.bsp')
    # Locations of Jupiter and its major satellites:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/jup365.bsp')

    # Optionally download locations of smaller satellites of Jupiter:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/jup344.bsp')


Similarly, if you are interested in Uranus, you could use: ::

    # Note, the exact URLs in this example may not work if new kernel versions are published
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls

    # Locations of planetary system barycentres: 
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/de430.bsp')
    # Locations of Uranus and its major satellites:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/ura111.bsp')

    # Optionally download locations of smaller satellites of Uranus:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/ura115.bsp')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/ura116.bsp')

.. hint::
    The kernels for the locations of planets are actually located in the `generic_kernels/spk/satellites <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/>`_ directory, so even if you are only interested in the central planet, you will still need to download at least one kernel from the satellites directory. Search the 
    `aa_summaries.txt <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/aa_summaries.txt>`_ file for the planet(s) you are interested in to find the required kernel(s).


Spacecraft kernels
------------------
If you are using observations from a spacecraft, you will also need to download the ephemeris kernels describing the spacecraft's position over time. For example, if you are using observations from the Hubble Space Telescope, you should run: ::

    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/HST/kernels/spk/')

The directory name for different missions can be found by searching the `NAIF archive <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_.


.. _small body kernels:

Small body kernels
------------------
The `JPL Horizons system <https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons>`_ can be used to generate SPICE kernels for small bodies, such as asteroids and comets, which may not be available on the NAIF archive. Simply select :guilabel:`Small-Body SPK File` as the ephemeris type in the `Horizons web application <https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons/app.html>`_ and download the generated SPK file. You should then place this file in your SPICE kernel directory, where it will automatically be loaded by PlanetMapper (see :ref:`customising the kernel directory<kernel directory>` below). For more information about the JPL Horizons generated kernels, see the `Horizons documentation <https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons/manual.html#spk>`_.

Manually defining kernel variables for small bodies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
For some bodies, the JPL Horizons generated kernels do not contain all the information needed to perform the SPICE calculations required by PlanetMapper. In these cases, you will need to manually create a text kernel file containing this required information, in addition to downloading the generated SPK file from JPL Horizons.

The following is an template for a text kernel file for `Chiron <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2060_Chiron>`_, which will allow PlanetMapper to use JPL Horizons generated Chiron kernels. The placeholder values should be replaced with appropriate values for your target body, then the file should be saved in your kernel directory with a `.tpc` file extension.
::

    \begindata

        NAIF_BODY_NAME += 'CHIRON'
        NAIF_BODY_CODE += 20002060

        FRAME_CHIRON_FIXED     =  1234567
        FRAME_1234567_NAME     = 'CHIRON_FIXED'
        FRAME_1234567_CLASS    =  2
        FRAME_1234567_CLASS_ID = 20002060
        FRAME_1234567_CENTER   = 20002060

        BODY20002060_RADII     = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)
        BODY20002060_POLE_RA   = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)
        BODY20002060_POLE_DEC  = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)
        BODY20002060_PM        = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)

    \begintext

- The `NAIF_BODY_` variables tell SPICE the name(s) that refer to the body with numeric ID 20002060 (`more details <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/cspice/bodc2n_c.html#Files>`__). This allows you to call PlanetMapper with the name `'CHIRON'` instead of the numeric ID. The numeric ID code for the target body will usually be in the filename of the JPL Horizons generated SPK file.
- The `FRAME_` variables define a new reference frame that is centred on Chiron (`more details <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/req/frames.html>`__). This frame will then be used by PlanetMapper to define any Chiron-centred coordinates (e.g. longitude/latitude).

    - The frame ID code, `1234567`, is arbitrary, but should not conflict with any other frame IDs that you are using. Values from 1400000 to 2000000 are `recommended for public use <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/req/frames.html#Selecting%20a%20Frame%20ID>`__.
    - The `'CHIRON_FIXED'` name is also arbitrary, and should be passed to PlanetMapper when creating a :class:`planetmapper.Body` object centred on Chiron:

    ::
        
        body = planetmapper.Body('CHIRON', target_frame='CHIRON_FIXED')

- The `BODY20002060_` variables are used to define the properties and orientation of Chiron itself. The `XXX.XX` values here are placeholders, and should be replaced with appropriate values to define the size, orientation and rotation of Chiron. See the `SPICE documentation <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/req/pck.html#Text%20PCK%20Contents>`__ for more details on these parameters. 


Other kernels
-------------
In some cases, you may require other kernels in addition to those listed above. You should be able to identify the kernels required by searching the `NAIF archive <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_. For example, you can download some comet ephemerides using ::

    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/comets/')

The `NAIF useful links page <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/naif/links.html>`_ may also be useful for finding other information and sources of kernels.


----

.. _kernel directory:

Customising the kernel directory
================================
By default, PlanetMapper downloads and looks for spice kernels in the `~/spice_kernels` directory. However, if needed (e.g. if you already have kernels saved elsewhere), this directory can be customised using the different methods described below. The environment variable method is usually the simplest and easiest.


Method 1: Environment variable
------------------------------
The easiest way to customise the directory is to set the environment variable `PLANETMAPPER_KERNEL_PATH` to point to your desired path. For example, on a Unix-like system, you can add a line to to your `.bash_profile` file to automatically set this environment variable: ::

    export PLANETMAPPER_KERNEL_PATH="/path/where/you/save/your/spice/kernels"


Method 2: Using `set_kernel_path`
---------------------------------
The function :func:`planetmapper.set_kernel_path` can be used to set the kernel path for a single script. This function *must* be called before using any other `planetmapper` functionality, so it is easiest to run :func:`planetmapper.set_kernel_path` immediately after importing `planetmapper`: ::

    import planetmapper
    planetmapper.set_kernel_path('/path/where/you/save/your/spice/kernels')

This path should also be set before downloading any SPICE kernels, otherwise they will be downloaded to the incorrect directory: ::

    import planetmapper
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    planetmapper.set_kernel_path('/path/where/you/save/your/spice/kernels')

    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/lsk/')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/pck/')


Automatic kernel loading
========================
PlanetMapper will automatically load SPICE kernels the first time any object inheriting from :class:`planetmapper.SpiceBase` (e.g. :class:`planetmapper.Body`) is created. All kernels in the directory returned by :func:`planetmapper.get_kernel_path` which `match any of the patterns <https://docs.python.org/3/library/glob.html>`__ `**/*.bsp`, `**/*.tpc` or `**/*.tls` are loaded by default. 

If you would like finer control over kernel loading, you can call :func:`planetmapper.base.prevent_kernel_loading` immediately after importing PlanetMapper to disable automatic kernel loading, then manually load kernels yourself using `spiceypy.furnsh`.

See :class:`planetmapper.SpiceBase` and :func:`planetmapper.SpiceBase.load_spice_kernels` for more detail about controlling automatic kernel loading.

Commit message:

Improve SPICE kernel documentation
Emphasise that lsk and pck kernels are required for any observation

docs/spice_kernels.rst, after:

.. _SPICE kernels:

SPICE kernels
*************

.. hint::
    If you are having issues with loading spice kernels after following the guide on this page, check the :ref:`list of common issues and solutions<common issues>`

Introduction
============
The core logic of PlanetMapper uses the SPICE system, which was developed by NASA's `Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/naif/>`_ to provide detailed and accurate information about the positions and properties of Solar System bodies and spacecraft. This SPICE database is stored in a series of files called 'SPICE kernels' which must be downloaded for PlanetMapper to function.

Most useful SPICE kernels can be found at https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/. Each individual SPICE kernel typically contains information about a specific object or set of objects (e.g. one kernel file may contain information about Jupiter and its moons, while another may contain information about a specific spacecraft). Therefore, you only need to download a small subset of the SPICE kernels.

If you already have the appropriate SPICE kernels saved to your computer, you can skip to the :ref:`section on customising the kernel directory<kernel directory>` below.


Downloading SPICE kernels
=========================
To aid in downloading appropriate SPICE kernels, PlanetMapper contains a series of useful functions such as :func:`planetmapper.kernel_downloader.download_urls` to download kernels from the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_. These functions will automatically download the SPICE kernels to your computer where they can be used by PlanetMapper, so you only need to worry about downloading the kernels once, then PlanetMapper will be able to automatically find and load them in the future.

.. note::
    By default, PlanetMapper will downloaded and search for kernels in a directory named `spice_kernels` within your user directory. If you would like to customise this location (e.g. if you already have kernels saved elsewhere), follow the instructions in the :ref:`section on customising the kernel directory<kernel directory>` below before downloading any kernels.

.. _required kernels:

Required kernels
----------------
To download kernels which are required for virtually every SPICE calculation, run the following commands in Python: ::

    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/lsk/')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/pck/')

This will automatically download a series of 'leap second kernels' and 'planetary constant kernels' to your computer. The function :func:`planetmapper.kernel_downloader.download_urls` effectively replicates the file structure from the `NAIF database <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_ to your local system. Therefore, the leap second kernels will be automatically downloaded to `~/spice_kernels/naif/generic_kernels/lsk/` and the planetary constant kernels will be downloaded to `~/spice_kernels/naif/generic_kernels/pck/`.

These required kernels are relatively small (~50KB for `.../lsk` and ~50MB for `.../pck`), so downloading them should be relatively fast. If you don't want to use :func:`planetmapper.kernel_downloader.download_urls`, you can instead manually browse and download files from https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/ yourself.

Once you have downloaded these required kernels, you will also need to download some of the ephemeris kernels described below.


Planetary ephemeris kernels
---------------------------
.. warning::
    Some SPICE ephemeris kernels can be very large (>1GB), so make sure you have enough free disk space when downloading.

The positions of solar system bodies (e.g. planets and moons) are contained in ephemeris kernels. The kernels are required for each body which you are observing, e.g. if you are using observations of Jupiter you will need to have a Jupiter kernel downloaded.

If you have enough disk space, you can easily download all the planet and moon kernels using: ::

    # Note, you will also need to download the lsk and pck kernels as described above
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/')

These `spk` kernels add up to ~30GB, so if you have limited disk space, you may want to instead download the specific kernels for the bodies you are interested in. Look at the `summaries` and `readme` text files at the top of the `planets <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/>`_ and `satellites <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/>`_ archive pages to see which specific files you want to download. 

For example, if you are only interested in Jupiter and its moons, you could use: ::

    # Note, you will also need to download the lsk and pck kernels as described above
    # Note, the exact URLs in this example may not work if new kernel versions are published
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls

    # Locations of planetary system barycentres:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/de430.bsp')
    # Locations of Jupiter and its major satellites:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/jup365.bsp')

    # Optionally download locations of smaller satellites of Jupiter:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/jup344.bsp')


Similarly, if you are interested in Uranus, you could use: ::

    # Note, you will also need to download the lsk and pck kernels as described above
    # Note, the exact URLs in this example may not work if new kernel versions are published
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls

    # Locations of planetary system barycentres: 
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/planets/de430.bsp')
    # Locations of Uranus and its major satellites:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/ura111.bsp')

    # Optionally download locations of smaller satellites of Uranus:
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/ura115.bsp')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/ura116.bsp')

.. hint::
    The kernels for the locations of planets are actually located in the `generic_kernels/spk/satellites <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/>`_ directory, so even if you are only interested in the central planet, you will still need to download at least one kernel from the satellites directory. Search the 
    `aa_summaries.txt <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/satellites/aa_summaries.txt>`_ file for the planet(s) you are interested in to find the required kernel(s).


Spacecraft kernels
------------------
If you are using observations from a spacecraft, you will also need to download the ephemeris kernels describing the spacecraft's position over time. For example, if you are using observations from the Hubble Space Telescope, you should run: ::

    # Note, you will also need to download lsk, pck and spk kernels as described above
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/HST/kernels/spk/')

The directory name for different missions can be found by searching the `NAIF archive <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_.


.. _small body kernels:

Small body kernels
------------------
The `JPL Horizons system <https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons>`_ can be used to generate SPICE kernels for small bodies, such as asteroids and comets, which may not be available on the NAIF archive. Simply select :guilabel:`Small-Body SPK File` as the ephemeris type in the `Horizons web application <https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons/app.html>`_ and download the generated SPK file. You should then place this file in your SPICE kernel directory, where it will automatically be loaded by PlanetMapper (see :ref:`customising the kernel directory<kernel directory>` below). For more information about the JPL Horizons generated kernels, see the `Horizons documentation <https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons/manual.html#spk>`_.

Manually defining kernel variables for small bodies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
For some bodies, the JPL Horizons generated kernels do not contain all the information needed to perform the SPICE calculations required by PlanetMapper. In these cases, you will need to manually create a text kernel file containing this required information, in addition to downloading the generated SPK file from JPL Horizons.

The following is an template for a text kernel file for `Chiron <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2060_Chiron>`_, which will allow PlanetMapper to use JPL Horizons generated Chiron kernels. The placeholder values should be replaced with appropriate values for your target body, then the file should be saved in your kernel directory with a `.tpc` file extension.
::

    \begindata

        NAIF_BODY_NAME += 'CHIRON'
        NAIF_BODY_CODE += 20002060

        FRAME_CHIRON_FIXED     =  1234567
        FRAME_1234567_NAME     = 'CHIRON_FIXED'
        FRAME_1234567_CLASS    =  2
        FRAME_1234567_CLASS_ID = 20002060
        FRAME_1234567_CENTER   = 20002060

        BODY20002060_RADII     = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)
        BODY20002060_POLE_RA   = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)
        BODY20002060_POLE_DEC  = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)
        BODY20002060_PM        = (XXX.XX XXX.XX XXX.XX)

    \begintext

- The `NAIF_BODY_` variables tell SPICE the name(s) that refer to the body with numeric ID 20002060 (`more details <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/cspice/bodc2n_c.html#Files>`__). This allows you to call PlanetMapper with the name `'CHIRON'` instead of the numeric ID. The numeric ID code for the target body will usually be in the filename of the JPL Horizons generated SPK file.
- The `FRAME_` variables define a new reference frame that is centred on Chiron (`more details <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/req/frames.html>`__). This frame will then be used by PlanetMapper to define any Chiron-centred coordinates (e.g. longitude/latitude).

    - The frame ID code, `1234567`, is arbitrary, but should not conflict with any other frame IDs that you are using. Values from 1400000 to 2000000 are `recommended for public use <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/req/frames.html#Selecting%20a%20Frame%20ID>`__.
    - The `'CHIRON_FIXED'` name is also arbitrary, and should be passed to PlanetMapper when creating a :class:`planetmapper.Body` object centred on Chiron:

    ::
        
        body = planetmapper.Body('CHIRON', target_frame='CHIRON_FIXED')

- The `BODY20002060_` variables are used to define the properties and orientation of Chiron itself. The `XXX.XX` values here are placeholders, and should be replaced with appropriate values to define the size, orientation and rotation of Chiron. See the `SPICE documentation <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/toolkit_docs/C/req/pck.html#Text%20PCK%20Contents>`__ for more details on these parameters. 


Other kernels
-------------
In some cases, you may require other kernels in addition to those listed above. You should be able to identify the kernels required by searching the `NAIF archive <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/>`_. For example, you can download some comet ephemerides using ::

    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/spk/comets/')

The `NAIF useful links page <https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/naif/links.html>`_ may also be useful for finding other information and sources of kernels.


----

.. _kernel directory:

Customising the kernel directory
================================
By default, PlanetMapper downloads and looks for spice kernels in the `~/spice_kernels` directory. However, if needed (e.g. if you already have kernels saved elsewhere), this directory can be customised using the different methods described below. The environment variable method is usually the simplest and easiest.


Method 1: Environment variable
------------------------------
The easiest way to customise the directory is to set the environment variable `PLANETMAPPER_KERNEL_PATH` to point to your desired path. For example, on a Unix-like system, you can add a line to to your `.bash_profile` file to automatically set this environment variable: ::

    export PLANETMAPPER_KERNEL_PATH="/path/where/you/save/your/spice/kernels"


Method 2: Using `set_kernel_path`
---------------------------------
The function :func:`planetmapper.set_kernel_path` can be used to set the kernel path for a single script. This function *must* be called before using any other `planetmapper` functionality, so it is easiest to run :func:`planetmapper.set_kernel_path` immediately after importing `planetmapper`: ::

    import planetmapper
    planetmapper.set_kernel_path('/path/where/you/save/your/spice/kernels')

This path should also be set before downloading any SPICE kernels, otherwise they will be downloaded to the incorrect directory: ::

    import planetmapper
    from planetmapper.kernel_downloader import download_urls
    planetmapper.set_kernel_path('/path/where/you/save/your/spice/kernels')

    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/lsk/')
    download_urls('https://naif.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/naif/generic_kernels/pck/')


Automatic kernel loading
========================
PlanetMapper will automatically load SPICE kernels the first time any object inheriting from :class:`planetmapper.SpiceBase` (e.g. :class:`planetmapper.Body`) is created. All kernels in the directory returned by :func:`planetmapper.get_kernel_path` which `match any of the patterns <https://docs.python.org/3/library/glob.html>`__ `**/*.bsp`, `**/*.tpc` or `**/*.tls` are loaded by default. 

If you would like finer control over kernel loading, you can call :func:`planetmapper.base.prevent_kernel_loading` immediately after importing PlanetMapper to disable automatic kernel loading, then manually load kernels yourself using `spiceypy.furnsh`.

See :class:`planetmapper.SpiceBase` and :func:`planetmapper.SpiceBase.load_spice_kernels` for more detail about controlling automatic kernel loading.
